# Dental-Insurance-Fee-Analysis-and-Negotiations

This is a project I did while working in a dental office and working with another company called Unlock the PPO. This company specializes in insurance fee negotiations. This project was mainly me communicating with other insurance companies and comparing my office's current rates with offers from insurance companies to decide whether staying in network is still profitable, or dropping their contract so that a third party insurance company can pay at a higher rate. 

A direct contract is the easiest and fastest way a dentist can get into network with an insurance company and start working as a network provider. 
It can be more profitable when dropping a direct contract, so that a higher paying insurance company can pickup after that contract and pay the office higher rates. 

### Purpose: 
- Gather and organize data containing rates for procedure codes to use for comparison. Sometimes other insurance companies can pay for other insurance companies at a higher rate with a third party network agreement.
- Generate reports to compare fee schedules and offer insights to make better informed decisions when negotiating.

### Structure:
#### 1. [Insurance-utilization-report](https://github.com/and33zy/Insurance-utilization-report)
  * This report was generated by using SQL on OpenDental, a dental office management program, to compile data to showcase how much revenue has been generated from individual insurance carriers.
  * Depicts how many claims, estimated payouts, and actual payouts from all insurance carriers used by the dental office.
    * Can show discrepencies when quoting treatment plans to patients
  * Most importantly highlights the most common insurance carrier that patients use.
  * This report is significant because it helps me and our dentist figure out which insurance carrier we can decide on terminating our contract with and which ones we are okay to stay in network to negotiate or leave alone.
  * Some insurance carriers are non-negotiable, if those are on the lower paying carriers, we can use this report to see if we have a lot of patients using that specific carrier.
  * This was given by Unlock the PPO for a newer version of OpenDental. Code was modified to  adjust to older version of software to find correct column names.

#### 2. [Procedures-by-Procedure-Code](https://github.com/and33zy/Procedures-by-Procedure-Code.git)
  * A report generated through OpenDental that tracks all known procedure codes used in our office.
  * Has a brief description of each procedure code used, the number of times a procedure code has been used between 01-Jan-2022 to 31-Dec-2022, how much revenue generated by each code and average fees based on all insurance company's fee schedule.

#### 3. [Cigna-Analysis-Report](https://github.com/and33zy/Cigna-Analysis-Report)
  * A comparison report to show % increase or decrease in fees with several offers given by Cigna.
  * Acess to original pdf files showing fee schedules from first and second offers.
  * Converted pdf to excel sheets
  * Shows differences in rates between current office fees, cigna offers, and fee schedule currently enrolled in with Careington Platinum schedule. 
